When the supreme court overturned Roe v Wade, Clarence Thomas suggested they might revisit same-sex marriage. Some couples aren’t waiting to find outOn a late June day in 2015, recent high school graduate Kaliyah Halsey and their mother were shopping for dormitory supplies when Kaliyah’s mother looked at her phone. “She was like, ‘Oh my God. Gay marriage is now legal in all 50 states. I’m so happy for you!’” recalls Kaliyah, now 25. “We were, like, crying in the middle of Kohl’s.”Four years later, while training for a new job at Wells Fargo, Kaliyah met Britney Halsey (née Justus). “She came in and I was just in awe,” Kaliyah recalls. The two began a friendship. A few months later, on 16 December 2019, Kaliyah asked Britney to be their girlfriend at the top of Rockefeller Center. On the same date in 2021, the two got engaged. They set their wedding date for 16 December 2023. “That way we could have our dream wedding,” says Kaliyah. The couple began saving up for a huge gathering of friends and family in Nashville, where they moved last year from their home of Roanoke, Virginia.But in late June, their plans changed. Britney, 23, called Kaliyah in tears. “If we don’t do this sooner rather than later, we’re just not gonna be able to do it at all.”When the supreme court overturned Roe v Wade, Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a concurring opinion that the court had “a duty to ‘correct the error’ established” in multiple landmark civil rights and privacy cases – including 2015’s Obergefell v Hodges, which enshrined marriage equality. Other conservative justices wrote that Obergefell wasn’t on the chopping block, but many people have found that hard to trust, as some of those same justices had previously implied to Congress that they wouldn’t overturn Roe.Thirty-five states still ban same-sex marriage via state law, constitutional amendment or both. If Obergefell was overturned, these prohibitions would be likely to resume.Understandably, that has members of the LGBTQ+ community feeling uneasy about the future. “We’re getting a lot of questions,” says Adam Polaski, the communications director at the Campaign for Southern Equality, which promotes LGBTQ rights in the south. He says that the dozens of anti-LGBTQ laws passed recently in southern states makes Thomas’s declaration particularly frightening.“Folks are worried because they’re seeing just an all-out assault on the LGBT community. They’re worried that the freedom to marry could be next,” says Polaski. In Buncombe county, North Carolina, where the organization is based, the percentage of marriage licenses issued to same-sex couples tripled shortly after the ruling.In Nashville, Britney and Kaliyah Halsey also felt they had to act fast. Tennessee, like North Carolina, still has a state ban on gay marriage. “I was just very, very depressed for a couple of days because reality set in,” says Britney. “None of our family, none of our friends are going to be there.”Four days after Britney called Kaliyah saying she worried they couldn’t wait a year, she married Kaliyah in a Nashville park, with no witnesses beyond their officiant.It was far from the “dream wedding” the two had long imagined. They woke up early to get to the county clerk’s office to pick up a marriage license. They threw together their wedding outfits – a white Old Navy dress and a button-down black and white shirt with pale pink shorts. Their friend who officiated made the hastily organized proceedings as special as possible, reading a poem by Maya Angelou and an excerpt of the Obergefell ruling.“We came home and watched Schitt’s Creek. It’s our comfort show,” says Kaliyah. “And then we went to bed at 9 o’clock,” adds Britney. “We really were just worn out.” The next day, they both went back to work.Kaliyah and Britney tried to make plans for a separate gathering with friends and family to celebrate their love. But they lost a lot of their enthusiasm after Britney says they were turned away from two venues in small towns outside Nashville. After Kaliyah explicitly told one venue that there would be no groom, the venue quickly replied saying the date they had been discussing was no longer available. Another venue refused explicitly on the grounds that the owner did not support gay marriage. Tennessee, according to a recent study by the Public Religion Research Institute, is among the least supportive states when it comes to LGBTQ+ rights. “We just didn’t really have the motivation for it any more,” says Britney.Kaliyah says their mom was dejected. “To be able to see your child walk down the aisle, and have the planning, tasting the food, the catering, picking out flowers. Our families were devastated,” Kaliyah says.New Orleans-based wedding officiant and premarital counselor LaToya Papillion-Herr started getting calls shortly after the decision – and Justice Thomas’s threat to Obergefell – came out in June. “That part is what really made people go, ‘OK, well, wait a minute. What happens to us then if that happens?’” says Papillion-Herr.Papillion-Herr, who works with many LGBTQ+ couples, says about one-third of those couples changed plans to get to the altar as soon as possible after Roe was overturned. “A fear of not being able to [wed] when their wedding date comes really took over,” she says.In July, she volunteered her services at an event called “Can’t Stop Love” at a restaurant in a suburb of New Orleans. “Marriage equality is on rocky ground but we’re not going to go down without a fight,” the Facebook description read. “There will be ministers present ready to perform marriages (while we still can).”The event ran like a marriage production line. One officiant married a few couples who picked up marriage licenses in advance. Papillion-Herr helped other couples begin the legal process of tying the knot. Elsewhere in the room, professionals helped couples with paperwork-heavy tasks like drawing up wills and declaring power of attorney for medical decisions. “Those are rights that marriage just automatically gives you in the state of Louisiana.” But, Papillion-Herr says, even married couples came out to the event. “Without a legal marriage, then all of that would be null. So they took care of the paperwork even if they were already married, so that they would be protected.”Though the United States constitution bans laws that could be enforced retroactively – giving some legal professionals hope that existing marriages may not be able to be undone in a hypothetical post-Obergefell future – attorneys and notaries across the country are still helping LGBTQ+ couples get legal protections beyond their marriage. Papillion-Herr understands why. She is in a same-gender, interracial marriage. Some legal scholars have speculated that the 1967 supreme court case ensuring interracial marriage could be reconsidered in light of the overturning of Roe. At the event, Papillion-Herr and her wife got their legal documents in order, too.The room thronged throughout the event, with constant waits for document preparation. Despite the somber catalyst, Papillion-Herr described a scene of hope and momentum, with the crowd snacking on cupcakes and chips while sharing resources to safeguard their futures.“My big suggestion for couples is to do what you feel is best and safest for your family to legally protect yourselves as much as you’re able to.”Up in Wisconsin, longtime wedding officiant Vicky Jones is also helping couples legally protect themselves in a fearful time. She says she doesn’t know if the government could take away a legal marriage. “That just seems too weird to me. But everything, everything feels weird to me right now … I just didn’t expect that my couples should have to be scared about this, but they are.” While Jones normally requires the couples she works with to go through months of premarital counseling before officiating their wedding, she is making exceptions for LGBTQ+ couples right now, allowing them to continue their counseling after their legal marriage. “What I’m saying to them is, let’s get you married now. And we’ll still have the wedding [ceremony] and it’ll still be beautiful and it’ll still be wonderful. But you’ll be legal.”One such couple who Jones recently married, Johnny and Lucas Keller (who requested altered names to respect their privacy), decided to keep their original autumn ceremony date. The day will bring together family and friends for a steampunk-themed celebration. But, Lucas says, “we just had a quick legal thing this past weekend to make sure it’s on paper before anyone can screw it up”.Last week, they met at Lucas’s parents’ home for their wedding. Without much time to practice, they read their vows off their phones. “We don’t even have rings yet,” says Johnny.Gay marriage – like abortion access – is very popular among the American public. A May 2022 Gallup poll revealed that support for same-sex marriage is at 71% – an all-time high. But Jones worries that marriage equality, if left to the states, won’t last in Wisconsin, where it would be only partially protected in the absence of Obergefell. Gerrymandering, Jones feels, has made it “practically impossible for LGBTQ-affirming people to be elected to the legislature”.Lucas and Johnny Keller agree. “The people who hold those political opinions are definitely not the majority,” says Johnny. “They just happen to be in charge.”Kaliyah and Britney Halsey planned to move to Nashville for the long haul. They wanted to save to buy a home and start a family there. But those plans have changed, too. Though they know they’ll never find themselves in a situation of having an unplanned pregnancy, they are worried that some IVF options may become more difficult to obtain given Tennessee’s abortion laws. The Halseys are also worried about finding themselves in a situation where Britney, who plans to carry the pregnancy, may be in danger – especially in a state where doctors who provide abortions could have to argue before a judge or jury that the mother’s life was at risk.Britney and Kaliyah are planning to stay in Nashville for another year, at which point they’ll move to a state with marriage and abortion protections. “Wherever we go, I don’t want something to happen where I don’t have a choice over my own life,” says Britney.“Roe v Wade is basically controlling our lives at this point,” says Kaliyah. “Having to move to another state to start a family, worrying about your marriage, all that – it shouldn’t happen.”