This live blog has now closed, you can find our latest political coverage hereRishi Sunak has accused his leadership rival Liz Truss of setting up a “moral failure” if she does not support the most vulnerable through the cost-of-living crisis.At the Tory hustings in Belfast, the former chancellor said:The most important issue facing our country in the short term is how are we going to get through this winter. I think millions of people are at risk of a very tough time and I’ve been very clear that my plan is to support them.I believe that we have to support vulnerable groups, those on low incomes and pensioners, directly with financial support, because a tax cut does not work for those people.Liz’s plan is to say ‘well, I believe in tax cuts, not direct support’. I don’t think that’s right because a tax cut for someone on her salary means 1,700 of help. For someone working really hard on a national living wage, in the care sector, that tax cut is worth about a 1 a week. For a pensioner, who is not working, that tax cut is worth precisely zero.That’s not a plan that I think is right for our country.If we don’t directly help those vulnerable groups, those on the lowest incomes, those pensioners, then it will be a moral failure of the Conservative government and I don’t think the British people will forgive us for that.Here are the key developments from the day:Rishi Sunak has accused his leadership rival Liz Truss of setting up a “moral failure” if she does not support the most vulnerable through the cost-of-living crisis. At the Tory hustings in Belfast, the former chancellor criticised Truss tax cut plan and said: “If we don’t directly help those vulnerable groups, those on the lowest incomes, those pensioners, then it will be a moral failure of the Conservative government and I don’t think the British people will forgive us for that.”The shadow home secretary has said comments from Tory leadership frontrunner Liz Truss, that British workers need “more graft”, are a “total disgrace”. Yvette Cooper told Sky News: “I think it reveals what she really thinks … This insult just shows, I think, that [Truss] does not understand working people right across the country. It’s deeply wrong of her to say this.”UK inflation has risen above 10% for the first time in 40 years, driven by soaring prices for food and fuel as households come under mounting pressure from the cost of living crisis. The Office for National Statistics said the consumer prices index rose by 10.1% in the year to July, up from a reading of 9.4% in June and entering double figures at an earlier stage than anticipated. The figure was last higher in February 1982.Unions are warning that the cost-of-living crisis has become a “living nightmare” for workers as the soaring rate of inflation is set to fuel more strikes. The Unite general secretary, Sharon Graham, said inflation had reached “new perilous levels” for workers and their families.The veteran retailer Stuart Rose has urged the government to do more to shield the poorest from double-digit inflation, describing the lack of action as “horrifying”, with a prime minister “on shore leave” leaving a situation where “nobody is in charge”. Responding to July’s 10.1% headline rate, the Conservative peer and Asda chair said: “We have been very, very slow in recognising this train coming down the tunnel and it’s run quite a lot of people over and we now have to deal with the aftermath of that.”Liz Truss has refused to recognise the importance of animal welfare in post-Brexit trade deals, the environment secretary has said. George Eustice was speaking at the Conservative Environment Network Tory leadership hustings on behalf of Rishi Sunak, and said he faced “challenges” in trying to get Truss to enshrine animal welfare in trade deals.London’s mayor has warned of a rise in shootings and stabbings amid concerns that the increasing cost of living could lead to more violence and make it easier for gangs to lure vulnerable young people. Sadiq Khan said millions of pounds more were being put into schemes to turn people away from violence. The Labour mayor has been criticised by some for his record on crime.Labour lost more than 91,000 members last year and recorded a £4.8m deficit, caused by staff redundancies, a drop in membership subscriptions and ongoing legal battles with former staff members. But the party also raised significantly more than the Conservatives over the course of last year, bringing in more £45m compared with about £31m by the Tories.Politicians from across the divide have expressed support for senior Conservative MP William Wragg after he said he would be taking a break to deal with depression and anxiety. He said both conditions are currently “severe” but he looks forward to “returning refreshed, better able to represent my constituents, loving life and myself a little bit more”.Nicola Sturgeon has condemned the abuse of journalists by pro-independence supporters outside Tuesday’s Tory leadership hustings in Perth as “disgraceful”, as other Scottish Nationalist politicians called for any members involved to be thrown out of the party immediately. But Scottish Tories accused the first minister of being “selective” in who she supported, amid reports of demonstrators spitting and screaming at older party members as they walked into Tuesday evening’s event.That’s it for today. We’ll be closing this blog shortly. Thanks so much for joining me. I’ll be back again tomorrow morning.The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has said she would immediately reduce taxes and introduce a moratorium on the green energy levy in an effort to curb inflation if elected.The former chancellor and leadership rival, Rishi Sunak, has accused her of setting up a “moral failure” if she does not support the most vulnerable people through the cost of living crisis. Both were speaking in Belfast during Tory hustings.Transport groups and opposition parties have reacted with bafflement to a proposal by Grant Shapps to look at mandatory insurance and registration for cyclists, something previously rejected by the Department for Transport (DfT) as impractical and counter-productive.In an interview with the Daily Mail that appeared to surprise his own officials, the transport secretary said he “absolutely” wanted to extend speed limits to cyclists, adding: “I see no reason why cyclists should break the road laws and be able to get away with it.”He added: “That obviously does then lead you into the question of, well, how are you going to recognise the cyclist, do you need registration plates and insurance and that sort of thing? So I’m proposing there should be a review of insurance and how you actually track cyclists who do break the laws.”The Mail said this was a reference to possible number plates or other identification for bikes. Wera Hobhouse, the Lib Dems’ spokesperson on transport, condemned what she called a “strange and pointless idea [that] would pile extra costs on to people who are trying to be more active”.The DfT did not dispute that this was what Shapps meant, but said there was no plan in place and it would be a matter for whoever was transport secretary under the new prime minister.Somewhat confusingly, in a separate interview with the Times, Shapps said he was “not attracted to the bureaucracy of registration plates”, adding: “That would go too far.”Mandatory registration for cyclists is almost unknown in any country, and is widely seen as difficult to enforce and bringing no net benefit given the relatively little danger that cyclists pose to others, and the probable impact of such bureaucracy on levels of cycling.The official DfT line, as explained by the junior transport minister Charlotte Vere in a parliamentary answer last year, is that the costs of registration “would outweigh the benefits, and this would deter many people from cycling”.Read more here:Liz Truss said she would “immediately” reduce taxes and introduce a moratorium on the green energy levy in a bid to curb inflation in Northern Ireland if elected.Speaking after a tour of Artemis Technologies in Belfast, Truss moved to assure people that she would treat rising inflation as an “urgent issue” and ensure “it’s dealt with”.She said:What I would do immediately is reduce taxes, reversing the [national insurance] increase, having a moratorium on the green energy levy to save people money on their fuel bills, and deal with the supply problem.We need to use more gas from our own resources here in this country. And we need to fix the energy problem by increasing supply.She added:The green energy levy is on all bills, so by removing that we would save people money on their bills. But what won’t work is simply a sticking plaster of handing more money out without dealing with the root cause.And what I’m determined to do is deal with the root cause: make sure that we have energy security in this country.Nicola Sturgeon has condemned the abuse of journalists by pro-independence supporters outside Tuesday’s Tory leadership hustings in Perth as “disgraceful”, as other Scottish Nationalist politicians called for any members involved to be thrown out of the party immediately.But Scottish Tories accused the first minister of being “selective” in who she supported, amid reports of demonstrators spitting and screaming at older party members as they walked into Tuesday evening’s event.Politicians, journalists and members of the public who attended the hustings at Perth Concert Hall reported that demonstrators threw eggs, spat at Tory members and barged past the outer security barriers before being pushed back by police.A number of different groups had congregated outside the building, including those standing behind “Yes” banners and others reading “Tory scum out” and “Liz Truss is a fanny”, as well as other carrying Socialist Workers party branded placards and some representatives of the Waspi women’s campaign. The “Tory Scum Out” banner was badged as by the ultranationalist group Siol nan Gaidheal.Andrew Bowie, the Scottish Conservative vice-chair and MP for West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine, tweeted: “Eggs being thrown, spitting at pensioners. The good old ‘Tory scum’ banner out … Good to see Nicola Sturgeon’s civic and joyous nationalism in action in Perth tonight.”In a widely shared video clip, protesters can be heard screaming abuse including “traitor” and “scum” at the BBC’s Scotland editor, James Cook, as he attempts to speak to them.Earlier this year, the corporation’s previous Scotland editor Sarah Smith said she had felt relieved to have left the country after enduring years of misogynistic “bile and hatred” while covering Scottish politics.Hurling abuse at journalists is never acceptable. Their job is vital to our democracy & it is to report & scrutinise, not support any viewpoint. @BBCJamesCook is a journalist of the highest quality and a total pro - the behaviour he was subjected to last night was disgracefulRead the full story here:Labour lost more than 91,000 members last year and recorded a £4.8m deficit, caused by staff redundancies, a drop in membership subscriptions and ongoing legal battles with former staff members.But the party also raised significantly more than the Conservatives over the course of last year, bringing in more £45m compared with about £31m by the Tories.The party treasurer’s report, logged with the Electoral Commission, declared Labour had 432,213 members as of 31 December 2021, compared with 523,332 the previous year.The report described the year as “difficult and demanding” but said a return to campaigning activities and the party’s annual conference post-Covid would begin to return the party to normal operations.Labour’s membership increased significantly during Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership to more than half a million, and it remains one of the largest in Europe – although large numbers of members left after Corbyn’s resignation, some disillusioned with Keir Starmer’s leadership.Hilary Schan, co-chair of the grassroots group Momentum, said:These figures are alarming. Keir Starmer’s pledge-breaking and factional approach has prompted an exodus of Labour members and a financial crisis for the party. Yet the leadership has welcomed these departures while actively alienating Labour’s affiliated trade unions, which give millions to the party.The accounts stated membership income was “comparable with 2017 and 2018”, at the height of the Corbyn-inspired membership boom, but said the party was facing increasing costs, including redundancy payoffs for large numbers of staff.The report said the severance scheme was the main reason for the deficit this year, which had required using cash reserves, noting that the party remained debt free.Read more here:Rishi Sunak has said he would seek to reform the energy market if made prime minister, in order to provide consumers with cheaper prices not tied to natural gas.Asked what further support he would provide to businesses with energy costs, the leadership hopeful said:Part of the reason is it gets passed through, so the reason inflation that all of us are seeing is, as of this morning, 10% is because businesses largely pass on the prices through. That is how a market economy works and the most effective thing for us to do is help people.The former chancellor added there were some “major reforms we need to make to the energy market”, as currently the price of energy generated by renewable sources had been driven up alongside the spike in natural gas prices.Sunak said:That is how our market works, it looks at who has got the highest price and, right now, because of a war it is natural gas, and we have to pay everyone else that price. That is not right and we need to reform our market to break that link.If we can do that, it will significantly lower wholesale electricity prices for all of the people that you spoke about and all of us.The hustings has ended now. Voters were asked to remember there will be a postal strike and that it was better to vote online or send off postal votes early.Rishi Sunak has accused his leadership rival Liz Truss of setting up a “moral failure” if she does not support the most vulnerable through the cost-of-living crisis.At the Tory hustings in Belfast, the former chancellor said:The most important issue facing our country in the short term is how are we going to get through this winter. I think millions of people are at risk of a very tough time and I’ve been very clear that my plan is to support them.I believe that we have to support vulnerable groups, those on low incomes and pensioners, directly with financial support, because a tax cut does not work for those people.Liz’s plan is to say ‘well, I believe in tax cuts, not direct support’. I don’t think that’s right because a tax cut for someone on her salary means 1,700 of help. For someone working really hard on a national living wage, in the care sector, that tax cut is worth about a 1 a week. For a pensioner, who is not working, that tax cut is worth precisely zero.That’s not a plan that I think is right for our country.If we don’t directly help those vulnerable groups, those on the lowest incomes, those pensioners, then it will be a moral failure of the Conservative government and I don’t think the British people will forgive us for that.Asked about how he would help end the Stormont standoff, Rishi Sunak says he and Liz Truss agree on the matter.He said:It starts with talking to all parties and making sure that we can try and resolve differences and bring people together. That’s what I would do as prime minister. I’m sure it’s what Liz would do as well. Both of us are committed to passing the bill that is in parliament, but you know, as well as I do, that bill will take time to pass.So in the interim, of course, as a new prime minister, I would seek to talk to Europe and Ireland and the French to see if we can find a negotiated outcome. I’ve got a track record and doing that I have good relationships with all my counterparts across the board because a negotiated outcome if it’s there, and history shows us that even when Europe say they’re not open to changing anything they have, because if that negotiated outcome is there, it will be far quicker than waiting for the bill to pass.So it’s worth at least trying but being no doubt about my resolve to fix the situation with the protocol which I think will unlock the power sharing and bring people together again.Rishi Sunak was asked during the hustings about problems with hiring in social care.In response, he said he would get much tougher when it came to benefits in order to get more people into work.He said:Some of the challenges that you’re seeing in social care are being felt across the economy and for many of you run small businesses. It’s the number one challenge other than energy costs. It’s getting access to workers and getting people to actually work and I strongly believe that part of the answer to this problem is being much tougher on our welfare system to get people off benefits and into work.I’ll tell you this right now, there are more people claiming unemployment benefit than there are jobs vacancies in the economy. I mean, just think about that for a second and that’s happening under a Conservative government. That’s clearly not right. Something’s gone wrong. Now, I think there are one or two very specific things we can do to change. If you’re on unemployment benefit and you work just nine hours on the national living wage, at that point, you don’t have to check in as much with your job coach at the jobcentre, you don’t have to take the extra hours that may be on offer or an extra job, and you can keep your benefits and nothing happens. I don’t think that’s right. Because ultimately, it’s your taxes and someone who’s working very hard’s taxes that are paid for that.If there are hours to do, if there’s a job going, people should have to be posted just being able to stay on benefits. That’s the change that I want to bring. Because I do think that is the right thing. It’s the conservative thing. Those are our values. We believe in working hard, right? And we want to support people off welfare into work because it’s good for them and their families too, because there’s dignity in work.The first question is from a former nurse who asks what Sunak will do about the NHS, pointing out that hospitals have mattresses on the floors as there are no beds.He says:The NHS is the country’s number one priority and it’s clearly under strain and if we want to be a government that cuts taxes, and I desperately want to deliver tax cuts for you and everyone else in the country, we have to be prepared to be bold about the NHS. Because if we’re not if we’re not prepared to do things differently, the NHS will continue to swallow up every pound that every one of you here and everyone else has. And I think we as conservatives need to try and change that dynamic. We need to reform and make the NHS more efficient. So we can talk less about how much money we’re always putting into it and more how the health care that we’re getting out of it.He gives an example of one of his plans:Last year across the NHS, there were 18 million appointments that were missed, not just at the GPS, but at the hospitals too. That’s not right and doesn’t value our doctors and nurses, and worse it deprives people of the care that they desperately need urgently need. So my plan is to get tough on people who are missing appointments. If we do that, it’s not about making money from them. It’s about changing behaviour in this country so that it is not acceptable [to miss appointments]. Because if people cancel those appointments in advance, we will free up an enormous amount of extra health care, which means people can get seen quicker they won’t be waiting the backlogs down faster without a single one of you, or anyone else having to pay a penny more in taxes.Rishi Sunak vows to make sure Keir Starmer “never walks through the doors of number 10 Downing Street” at the hustings in Belfast.He continues:In conclusion, I’ll just say this, you saw me as chancellor at the beginning of the pandemic acting boldly radically to successfully safeguard our economy through the biggest storm it had experienced in 300 years.As prime minister, I promise you that I will apply that same sense of urgency and grip to everything else that government does, as we create a better Britain. A Britain where our children can walk safely on the streets at night, a Britain where the NHS is reformed and efficient and there for us when we need, a Britain where our schools and apprenticeships are the envy of the world in providing opportunity and a Britain where our economy is the most dynamic that has ever been with our businesses investing and innovating to create jobs in every part of our country.Rishi Sunak has taken to the stage and is making his opening statement.He says:When it comes to rebuilding the economy, you don’t need me to tell you what the problem is. We saw it today in the figures, it’s inflation. And we’ve seen this story before. Inflation is the enemy it makes everyone poorer, eats into people’s savings, their pensions and it pushes up mortgage rates.That’s why this autumn and winter as prime minister, I will make sure that we support especially the most vulnerable in our society, with the means to help get through what will be a difficult time because that’s the compassionate conservative thing to do. But what I will not do is pursue policies that risk making inflation far worse and last thing for longer, because that is not going to help anyone. And especially if those policies seem to amount to borrowing £50bn, and putting that on the country’s credit card. Then asking our kids and our brains to pick up the tab because for me that’s not right, not sensible and it is certainly not conservative.But I am going to cut taxes and in this parliament for the first time in 16 years with my plans we will cut income tax, because I want to demonstrate that under a Conservative government that I lead hard work will always pay. But I’m going to do that responsibly by being tough on public spending and by growing our economy, which is why this autumn I want to radically change how we tax businesses, cutting taxes for those businesses that are doing the right thing and investing and innovating because that’s how you drive growth and productivity in a modern economy economy.Liz Truss was asked about her support of Boris Johnson.The audience member said she had supported a prime minister that has “continually lied to the Queen, parliament and the entire United Kingdom therefore does not bring into question your own personal integrity and honesty?”In response, Truss said:I don’t I don’t agree with that. Boris Johnson has been an excellent prime minister.He’s delivered on Brexit. He delivered on the Covid vaccine and he delivered on standing up to Vladimir Putin backing the Ukrainians and I’m proud of what he did.What we need to do now is we need to deliver on the promises we made in 2019 to people across the United Kingdom and that is what I am determined to do.Liz Truss said she will be “very clear” with US House of Representatives speaker, Nancy Pelosi, over the Northern Ireland protocol.The foreign secretary was asked in Belfast by a Tory member to reassure the party that she would not bow to pressure from the EU, the Republic of Ireland and the US over post-Brexit measures.She replied:I took on responsibility for negotiating the Northern Ireland Protocol, and against a lot of the advice in Whitehall and against of the wishes of some of the people you’ve mentioned, and I will be very clear with people like Nancy Pelosi exactly what I think about this and exactly what we need to do. I have got on with delivering this.She added that the bill is “absolutely legal”.Liz Truss is asked how she would fix the benefit system. The audience member who is a small business owner asks:If we take a single parent working, it gets to the stage now where people can’t afford to work if they work more than 16 hours a week [because] it starts to affect the benefits and they can’t afford to lose them. As a small business owner, it makes it much more difficult for us to recruit people. So how could you see to reward people to work rather than to not work for you?Truss says:There are a large number of people now across the United Kingdom who are economically inactive. What we need to do is encourage those people into work and we’re also facing businesses that have a skill shortage at the same time. And it is about changing the incentives in the benefit system.And that is what I would seek to do over time. To get more people into work, but also creating the jobs and the opportunities that that people could work in. And that’s why it’s important that we keep taxes [low], we’ll reverse the national insurance increase. So we help businesses thrive, but we’re also helping people get those jobs by making the incentives in the benefit system much clearer.The next question is about abortion rights. Liz Truss is asked if she will be “the modern day William Wilberforce and see abortion abolished and infanticide ended” or if not if she would let the people of Northern Ireland have their say on this issue.To the loudest round of applause so far, she says no.I’m afraid I don’t agree with you. I think we need we are a United Kingdom and we need to apply laws right across the United Kingdom. That is what being a union is.