This fly-on-the-wall documentary series follows the custody officers employing a new approach to remanding people in custody. Plus, The Rap Game UK. Here’s what to watch this evening“It’s like Loose Women this, isn’t it? Loose Retention Officers!” So says one of the “unsung heroes” at Grimsby’s state-of-the-art £14m Birchin Way custody facility. This new fly-on-the-wall series sees the custody team officers use banter to help get through shifts. Tonight, they detain a woman dressed as Harley Quinn for assaulting an officer, and a repeat offender, “Gangster Granny”, who has stolen a fountain pump from Grimsby Garden Centre. Hollie RichardsonWater companies are currently reporting vast profits. At the same time, only 14% of rivers in Britain have good ecological status. There’s something wrong with this picture – and our current drought is only going to make it worse. Joe Crowley fronts this worrying look at ways of addressing these problems. Phil HarrisonReal-life medical shows are at their most powerful when they depict the sheer pressure staff are under, and this episode, filmed in early 2022, sees the North East Ambulance crew overloaded. But their warmth and dedication never wavers as they look after elderly people sharing memories and a five-year-old who has fallen off a quad bike. Hannah VerdierAs the rap boot camp continues, the artists discover their pairings for the clash challenge and there’s an energising visit from Lethal Bizzle. It’s also time to learn a bit more about what makes the contenders tick: tonight, Target, Krept and Konan are digging deeper into their personalities and, specifically, their perceptions of Britishness. PHRomesh Ranganathan returns with the 17th season of this fun sports quiz series, with team captains Jamie Redknapp and new regular face Micah Richards. Joining their teams tonight: Jo Brand, Declan Rice, Jordan North and Josh Widdicombe. HRHorse lover Fabia struggles to date in her rural home; can Fred Sirieix stir up some romance for her in the restaurant? Meanwhile, bibliophile Ria has a good head on her shoulders as she searches for a first boyfriend (she, quite rightly, thinks Mr Darcy is “a right prick”). HRSaint Frances (Alex Thompson, 2019), 11.15pm, Film4Kelly O’Sullivan scripts and stars in a wonderfully frank film centred around women’s health issues. She plays Bridget, 34, a waitress with little in the way of maternal instinct, who gets a job nannying cute but wilful six-year-old Frances (Ramona Edith Williams), while one of the girl’s two mothers, Maya (Charin Alvarez), struggles with her new baby. There is plenty in the relationship between Bridget and Frances to captivate, but the film is most interesting when it deals with the women and their problems – menstruation, abortion and postpartum depression: all topics getting an all-too rare airing on screen. Simon Wardell